# Using Spring Boot 2 With Spring Initializr - Module 2 Demonstration

This page provides details for the module 2 demonstrations of the Using Spring Boot 2 With Spring Initializr Pluralsight course.

## Project Links

* Spring Initializr Web UI: https://start.spring.io

## Demo 1 Script - Exploring Your First Initializr Generated Project

1. I've opened the browser to the Spring Initializr web UI at https://start.spring.io. Let's start in the upper left section of the page by selecting the project type.
2. Here you can select either Maven or Gradle as your build tool. The choice here will really depend on the build tool that is standard for your organization. The examples throughout this course should work for either option. I'll be selecting Maven for this course.
3. Next, you can select the preferred language. As Java continues to be the most popular of the three options, I chose it for this course. If your organization or team standardizes on Groovy or Kotlin, please remember that choosing either language may result in inconsistencies as it's outside the scope for the course.  
4. Here is the selection for the Spring Boot version to use. This course covers any Spring Boot 2 version including and above 2.7.0. I'll select version 2.7.0.  
5. In the project metadata section, you can define the data that drives content in your project.
   1. The group name follows a reverse domain name structure that uniquely identifies your project group. I'll use the name:
       ```
       com.pluralsight.michaelhoffman.springinitializr
       ```
   2. The artifact is the name of the application within the project group. For the artifact name, I'll use:  
       ```
       first-project
       ```
   3. The name is the application name. Note the web UI auto-filled this based on the artifact name, but I'm going to override it with:
       ```
       SpringInitializrFirstProject
       ```
   4. The description provides details about the project. I'll just put the name of the project in the description as:
       ```
       SpringInitializrFirstProject
       ```
   5. The package name is the default package generated under the source directory of your project. Again, the web UI auto-fills it; however, I need to update it to the value I want, which is:
       ```
       com.pluralsight.michaelhoffman.springinitializr.firstproject
       ```
   6. For packaging, you can select Jar or War. In most cases, you'll select Jar unless you are deploying a War file to an application server that requires it. I'm going to select Jar.
   7. Finally, you can select the Java version. For this course, all demonstrations will use Java 17. If you choose to use Java 8 or 11, you may run into inconsistencies. Let me select 17 now.
6. For this demo, I won't be adding any dependencies.
7. At this point, I have three options at the bottom of the page.
   1. Let's start by clicking the Share button. This modal will allow me to copy a URL that includes all the options I selected from the UI. I can then share this URL with others so that they can start a project with the same configuration. Let's close the modal.
   2. Next, I can click the generate button. This will generate a zip file of the project and save it to the local hard disk. From here, you can unzip the file and begin working on it from your IDE.  
   3. The final button is the explore button. Let me open that now.
8. Clicking explore will open a new window to explore the Spring Boot project contents that will be generated by the Web UI. This is a great way to preview what's being generated.
   1. Let's start by clicking the .gitignore file. Here you see the contents are pre-populated with common files and folders that should be ignored when committing your code to git.
   2. Next, let's open the HELP.md file. This file provides some initial documentation based on your project selections. Since I chose Maven, the file has been customized to Maven resources.
   3. By choosing Maven as the build tool, several Maven-related files will be generated for me. Let me start by expanding the .mvn folder. Here you can see the maven wrapper library has been included in the project. The maven script file mvnw has also been included in the root directory.
   4. Let's open the Maven POM file, pom.xml.
      1. Starting with the parent element, you can see that the project is defined to be a child project of the spring boot starter parent project.
      2. Here are additional elements that were defined in the Initializr form, including the group ID, artifact ID, name and description.
      3. Here the Java version has been defined as part of a property.
      4. Next, you see two dependencies that are added by default, the spring boot starter and spring boot starter test libraries. These will each bring in additional transitive dependencies as part of Spring Boot's opinionated approach to project configuration.
      5. Finally, the spring boot maven plugin is defined here. The plugin supports packaging your project as a JAR or WAR and running your spring boot application.
   5. Finally, let's expand the source directory.
      1. The package I entered on the UI has been generated here.
      2. I'll open the Java file SpringInitializrFirstProjectApplication. This file contains the generated Spring Boot class using the name I entered in the UI.
      3. Under the main resources path is an application.properties file. Let me select that now. As you can see, this is empty to begin with.
      4. Finally, user the test path is a unit test generated for you named, "SpringInitializrFirstProjectApplicationTests". Let me open that now. This is a simple Spring Boot test that will verify the Spring context loads properly when executed.
9. That covers the initial demonstration of generating a Spring Boot 2 project with Spring Initializr. Hopefully you see how easy it is to get an initial project up and running with the web UI. Let's continue by discussing other ways to use Spring Initializr.
